For this exercise, you use a dataset from Aequitas
called Compas that looked at the results from criminal risk algorithms.
You are asked to perform
a Fairness Disparity Analysis with using the reference group Asian females under 25.
I reference a documentation for more details and gave
some the key instructions about this type of analysis in the notebook.
I just want to note though,
there's a lot of functionality available,
in Aequitas and we're just giving a snapshot of what is available for you to use.
So here's some more information about the Aequitas Compas Dataset.
This was a dataset from 2016 from ProPublica that looked
at automated criminal risk assessment algorithms and we adapted it,
the dataset from the notebook that aequitas
provides and preprocessed with this script as well.
Here are some more instructions about calculating disparities across reference groups.
Again, this was adapted from the notebook and from the site.
So now, let's move on to actually working with this data.
So we read this in and here's a preview of what this dataset looks like.
As you can see,
the score label value,
these are standard for how you use aequitas and then we have
a demographic information which should be pretty clear to understand.
So race, gender and they have some age bin as well.
Now, we're on to the solution,
in terms of data preparation,
this is similar to the method we went over in the walk through.
Next, we can use this data to extract some of
the metrics across the dataset and groups in a summary table,
there's a nice function to see the metrics in a combined visual as well.
This is more to show you what can be done to explore aequitas.
We'll now go to actual reference group analysis.
But I did want to show you how you could easy look at
different metrics across the different attributes.
So for the Fairness Disparity Analysis,
we need to create a reference group,
in this case, we were given Asian female under 25 as the reference group.
So we add that to a dictionary in this argument here and now we're ready
for the next part which is to actually analyze a particular metric.
In this case, we're asked to focus on false positive rate.
False positive rate indicates that someone was falsely identified by the algorithm.
For this plot, I just wanted to note that the reference group is always equal to
one and is in gray and the other boxes are multiples of one.
So what this is saying is that each group is
some multiplier which is more or less likely to be falsely identified.
For our example here,
when we plot the disparities,
we can see that African Americans are over five times
more likely to be falsely identified as our reference group.
Hispanic and Caucasian groups as well are over two
times more likely to be falsely identified than our Asian reference group.
Hopefully this can help you see how tools like aequitas can help you identify bias in
your model's predictions for different demographic groups and in particular,
allow you to even choose key reference groups to consider.